Surfer Koa Smith had the ride of a lifetime.

Smith is a 23-year-old from Hawaii. In June, he was surfing off the coast of Namibia. The country is located on the western shore of Africa. Smith rode a wave for two minutes straight. 

Smith stayed upright for nearly a mile. He traveled through eight barrels. This is very, very rare. Barrels are the hole-like spaces formed by the curve of the wave as it breaks over the rider's head.

The Ride Was Caught On Camera

Smith and videographer Chris Rogers filmed the entire ride. This is almost as amazing as the ride itself. One camera was on a drone, a kind of small aircraft. It does not have a pilot. A drone is flown by someone on the ground. 

Smith also wore a special GoPro camera as he rode. 

Such a ride has never been documented before.

Surfers Track The Perfect Wave

Smith owes his success to using science as well as taking risks.

A meteorologist tracks storms days before they hit. Similarly, surfers like Smith read weather charts. They try to predict when and where huge waves will hit. It is not easy. 

Smith will drop everything in search of the perfect wave.

"He can be in one place one day, and you call him and he says, 'I'm taking off for Africa tomorrow,'" says Ryan Runke. He is Smith's assistant. 
Skeleton Bay Is Far Away

The ride happened in a spot called Skeleton Bay. 

Getting there is not easy. You have to know someone who knows the area. It took a two-day plane ride from Hawaii to get there. Then, he took a car ride through the desert. Finally, he drove on sandy, unmarked roads to the ocean. The beach itself has hundreds of angry seals. It also has thousands of jackals. In the water, surfers might see a great white shark.

"When you're out there, you're really out there," Smith said. 

This Ride Has Been Years In The Making

Smith said he spent days at the beach as a kid. There wasn't much else to do where he grew up. 

"I started surfing when I was three," he said. "My brother is four years older. When he started, it was, 'If he can do this, I can do this.'"

By age six, he was good enough for competitions.

At age 12, he partnered with the sports clothing company Nike.

In 2020, surfing will be an Olympic sport for the first time. The Olympics are not an immediate goal, Smith says. Still, he likes competition. 

Whatever happens, that day on Skeleton Bay will stick with him for a long time. He called the wave "life-changing."