By the numbers: 8 barrels and 120 seconds later, 1 surfer makes history with epic ride

Surfer Koa Smith has done something no one has ever done in the sport.

The 23-year-old from Hawaii was surfing off the coast of the African country Namibia. He rode a wave for 120 seconds straight. Smith stayed upright for nearly a mile as he traveled through an unheard-of eight barrels. A barrel is the hollow space formed by the curve of the wave as it breaks over the rider's head.

Filming The Wave Was Not Easy

Smith and videographer Chris Rogers filmed the entire ride. Filming the entire ride is almost as amazing an accomplishment as the ride itself. One camera was attached to a drone that hovered overhead. A drone is a small plane that has no pilot but is controlled from the ground. There was also a GoPro camera that Smith wore while he rode.

"I'd like to think that everything I've done my whole life led up to that moment," Smith said of his ride in June. Such a ride has never been documented before.

Smith owes his success to using science as well as taking risks.
Surfers Will Drop Everything For The Perfect Wave

A meteorologist tracks storms several days before they hit. Similarly, Smith and many top surfers have mastered the art of reading weather charts. They try to predict when and where the biggest waves will hit. It's not easy to know exactly where they will come. 

Smith is more than willing to drop everything in search of the perfect wave.

"He can be in one place one day, and you call him and he says, 'I'm taking off for Africa tomorrow,'" says Ryan Runke. He is Smith's assistant.
"You Know You're Sacrificing Your Life For This"

The location of Smith's great triumph is called Skeleton Bay. It's a stretch of beach along the South Atlantic Ocean, on the western coast of Africa.

Getting there is not easy. Don't bother trying to go unless you know someone who knows the area. It's a two-day plane ride from Hawaii, followed by a car ride through the desert. It ends with a journey down a stretch of sandy, unmarked roads to the ocean. The final stop is at a beach where a lucky handful of surfers must face hundreds of aggressive seals, thousands of jackals and, once in the water, the occasional great white shark.

"When you're out there, you're really out there, and you're kind of on your own," Smith said. "But when you're out there, you're not thinking about it. You know you're sacrificing your life for this."

A Lifelong Dream

Smith grew up on the island Kauai. He said he got into surfing the way many kids do in Hawaii.

"There's not much to do there," he said. "My parents would drop us off at the beach. You start playing in the sand, playing in the ocean, body surfing, boogie boarding and it keeps evolving. I started surfing when I was three. My brother is four years older. When he started, it was, 'If he can do this, I can do this.'"

When he was six, he qualified for his first competitions. At age 12, he was working with the athletic clothing company Nike.
Surfing Is Headed To The Olympics

In 2020, surfing will be an Olympic sport for the first time. Some surfers don't care much for competition. They just like chasing waves and filming the action. Others want to make money in competitions.

The Olympics are not his immediate goal, but Smith has not ruled out competition. The next Olympics, in 2020, will take place in Tokyo, Japan. 

"There's something about performance pressure that allows you to dig deep and feel something you couldn't really feel any other way," he said.

In a way, though, he's already won his gold medal. That day on Skeleton Bay will live on, both in his mind and on the video, for a very long time.

"There was a point where I was at four barrels and I was already like, 'This is amazing,'" he said. "It looked like the wave was over, but it formed again. And I was like, 'Whoa!' This went from a good wave to like a life-changing wave."